# Stray Text

This questions hold interest in psychological science, and has broader relevance for relationship research.

Presently, few studies in relationship research address causality, but rather investigate statistical association between actors and partners over time.  However, to identify causality requires stating a casual contrast of interest on a well-defined treatments, and ensuring that individuals sampled from a population of interest are randomly assigned to treatment conditions randomly. Because we cannot observe how any individual would have responded to treatment they did not receive, individual causal effects remain elusive. However, asymptotically, randomisation enables investigators to infer population average responses because individuals within treatment conditions are exchangeable. 

Notably, for many theoretically interesting questions randomised controlled experiments are not feasible or ethical. In observational research, identifying causal effects requires satisfying assumptions that we take for granted in experiments, and careful workflow in which investigators state (1) a target population of interest; (2) a causal question stated as a contrast between predicted population averages under clearly defined treatments; (3) identification assumptions according to which individuals assignments to the conditions that are contrasted are "as good as random"; (4) a statistical estimator for the causal quantities; (5) a statistical model and its assumptions; (6) sensitivity analyses with which to evaluate results [@bulbulia2024].  

To start, investigators must ensure that outcomes do not occur before the treatments to be contrasted. In experiments, it is obvious that investigators should not report events that precede the experimental manipulations as outcomes. However, with observational data such assurances are typically lacking. Typically investigators must collect repeated measures data over time. Notably, although temporal resolution is necessary for causal inference it is not sufficient.  Investigators must state a well-defined pair, or set, of treatments (also known as 'exposures') to be contrasted. Again, in randomised controlled experiments, the conditions to be contrasted are defined by the treatments that are administered, including any control conditions. In observational settings, investigators do not administer the exposures of interest. The exposures, and the contrasts, must be clearly stated. Credible causal inference requires that the interventions to be compared are actually observed within the sample across all levels of the co-variates included in our statistical models. And it is the initiation into exposure conditions that count. Consider for example a lethal exposure. If we merely track the association of the harmful exposure over time those robust to its damage will be over represented. Such a 'healthy-worker bias' may give the illusion of a positive relationship between the exposure and its outcomes when in fact the causal association is harmful.  Despite sophisticated statistical modelling practices and time series data, relationship investigators have yet to systematically employ methods for robust causal inferences in their work. 

